get started then so cat scanning the
universe
using quasar light and you should always
start with a joke so here is a big
cat being scanned in a cat scanner i
just thought i'd throw that in
but we're going to use our instrument
quasars for
doing this cat scanning and so i better
say what they are
and the discovery goes back to the 1950s
in the
cambridge third cambridge radio
survey of the sky and this image here is
3c
48 and the image of one of these strange
objects that was very bright in the
radio but didn't seem to have much by
way of a
an optical object to go with it
and it was quite a battle to pin down
what these radio sources were
the uh general bank telescope here
76 meter dish was used uh for part of it
but it was also done using uh the arrays
in cambridge
where they connect a whole lot of
telescopes together the so-called
interferometry which gives you
a greater resolution if you have the
half mile array
at cambridge you have the effect of a
half mile
uh dish which obviously nobody could
afford to build but it gives you that
um resolution and this revealed
the locations of some of these objects
uh to
get be very very small indeed
tiny little objects on the sky here's an
all-sky
map showing where they came from um
you can see they're randomly scattered
over the whole of the
360 degrees of the sky these elliptical
maps are where we've
unwrapped the sphere of the sky and
pasted it onto
a flat plain you quite often see them
and the name quasar was given for
quasi-stellar radio
source quasi-stellar because all that
could be seen was a very very
tiny object that looked like a star and
didn't reveal any structure at all
in the the optical side of things
another interesting
way in which they were tracked down was
uh in 1962
3c273 like quasar from that survey
had the moon pass in front of it and of
course that blocked the
radio beam and from the timing of the
loss of radio signal
they could work out exactly where the
object must be in fact the moon did it
several times giving them the ability to
triangulate a little bit
and finally they tracked it down to this
rather
pathetic and uninspiring little tiny dot
that's been circled
down here in this nice image so whatever
was giving this
very very powerful radio signal
corresponded with a tiny little speck in
the optical
side and as you can see the discovery
was
famous enough that it made the front of
time magazine
so 3c273
was the first one for which the spectrum
was taken
and very very strange it was too
what you see across the bottom we have
the wavelength going
longer wavelengths to the right and
there's a kind of declining curve of a
background
with some rough sticky out spikes
sticking out above it these are the
emission lines
but nobody could work out what these
emission lines corresponded to
the solution came from the cosmic red
shift
and the idea is that when an object is
moving away from us or being carried
away from us by the expansion of the
universe
the doppler shift causes the lines
in the spectrum to move towards longer
wavelengths to the red end
if it's coming towards you they'd be
blue shifted the other way
and so if you had a spectrum
at the bottom here of your object you
compared it with the reference
spectrum at the top here you'd see that
the
positions of the lines have all been
shifted to the right
you can work out from that shift how far
away they are
and eventually that was done
um and very famously it was used for
galaxies by edwin hubble to discover the
expansion of the universe of course
but when they measured the redshift for
3c273
they discovered that it was enormous it
was 15.8 percent
which is a very high figure and it
implied
that uh the the object was being carried
away from us at 47
000 kilometers per second that wasn't
the limit though there was another one
3c48 which was even higher
and that was 37 of the speed of light
so over a third of the speed of light
was the
velocity that it was receding at and
according to hubble's law
that puts it a very very long way away
across the universe
and if it's that far away it must be
immensely bright
so what we think these
quasars are are the feeding black holes
the supermassive
black holes in the middle of other
galaxies
where they voraciously drawing material
in with their gravity
whipping it up into the uh
very very high temperatures of an
accretion disk
and then spewing material out along the
jets
uh black holes are very very messy
eaters and
uh once the the gas and the magnetic
fields get tangled up
then it forms these jets in a rather
complicated way
here's some pictures of some actual
quasar
jets um there's the one of the first
ones at the top left there
here's a the quasar in the center and
that where the jets are
uh dumping their energy into the
intergalactic medium here
i love this picture this is an optical
picture and it corresponds
to this earlier radio map of the same
thing so
this is the sort of data that a radio
telescope would have been producing
earlier on and so
this enormous brightness and yet tiny
size
and the enormous redshift all adds up to
them being very very powerful
but some of them like the one imaged
here this object is not a star
this is a quasar and it's 9 billion
light years
away uh two-thirds of the uh
age of the universe the radio and light
has been traveling from it
towards us so it was formed very very
early on in the
dawn of time
so actually when we look at the spectrum
of 3c 273
bearing in mind that 15.8 percent of the
speed of light
redshift we can work out what these
peaks
are and they're labeled here with h
delta gamma beta and alpha so this peak
here
that's sitting at what 7
500 angstroms so 750 nanometers
that should be at 650 and it's the
hydrogen
alpha line that we use for some of our
solar observing a
visible light in the red end of the
spectrum
but here it's been shifted right off
beyond the visible and into the infrared
so
you wouldn't be able to see this and
these h alpha h
beta and so on these are lines in the
spectrum of
ordinary hydrogen
so a little bit uh then about the
theory of the atom and why these uh
elements give off these particular lines
this is a the boar model of the hydrogen
atom here
we've got a proton in the middle with an
electron orbiting around it
um and boar assumed initially that they
orbited
in circles and if you want to do that
and you have your gcseo level in mind
it's very easy to do
you can just take um the
formula from newton of force equals mass
times acceleration
and prove that if you're moving in a
circle that's equal to
the mass times the square of the speed
that you're moving
divided by the radius so here's the
mathsy bit
there's the right radius of a circle
planet moving sideways with velocity v
but a little bit later it's moved around
the orbit it's still at the same
radius r but the velocity has changed
not in magnitude so the length of the
line is the same
but it's changed direction now it's been
pulled round by the gravity
um and if we take those two arrows and
slide them over here and join them at
the
tip we can make a triangle with two
sides equal
and the third side is the change
the uh acceleration towards the middle
has caused
this little extra bit of velocity to be
included in the diagram
but what we notice is that this triangle
and this red triangle over here are both
isosceles triangles they both have the
same two sides
um and this means that
we can also determine that the angle
here
must be the same because the change in
direction
is the same as the change in the the
amount of
that you've moved around the orbit by
the this angle that you've done
here will add up to 360 once you've gone
right round
and this vector the velocity vector will
have also gone 360. so the angles must
be the same
so we've got some similar triangles and
this is where it gets a little bit hairy
um if the triangles are similar then the
ratios of the sides
can be set to be equal to each other so
we can write
dv divided by either v1 or v2 but let's
just call it v
is equal to ds this one divided by
r and
run through the maths we can get to the
equation
that we're after we get uh by
rearranging it
we get that dv by dt
which is the rate of change of velocity
that's the acceleration
is equal to um this stuff on the right
and by substituting back in we can get v
squared over r so we can work out what
the force must be towards the center
and i get my gcse students to do that
and then they can use it
with the formula that newton gave for
gravity
and start working out all sorts of
things like kepler's laws and other
things
and i just wanted to note here that the
reason that this all matters
uh for atoms is because the force
in gravity looks like this it looks like
a big constant g times the two masses
divided by r squared
and that's the same for elec electricity
the
force holding an electron in orbit is
some other constant k times
the product of the two charges well
that's one for the electron
and one for the uh proton they both got
the same charge
divided by the square of the distance so
all of those sorts of
uh learnings from planetary science also
work inside atoms
and so you can do yet more exciting
maths which it won't bore you with
and work out that
the what the orbits of the electrons in
atoms must be
but and this is the crucial bit
electrons behave
in a rather funny way according to the
laws of quantum mechanics
and what this tells us is that you can
only
fit an electron into an orbit
if a whole number of wavelengths of the
electron will
match as in the diagram at the bottom
there
so you can only have a whole number of
oscillations of the electric field
if you end up with a partial number of
waves
going around with a slightly bigger
circle that's not allowed
so the upshot of all of that when you
put it all together
is that the radius has to be
proportional to
some number n squared where n
is the quantum number it's the number of
waves that you can fit around here
um which i suppose makes sense because
the it's all to do with circles so in
our
boar atom we have these different energy
levels
numbered by the value of n from from
that
and n equals one is the bottom energy
level n equals two is the next one n
equals three is the next one
and the point of this is that when an
electron moves from
one level to another the energy level is
different
the amount of energy associated with
each orbit is different because
the electron is moving at a different
speed
and so that energy is given out
as light in a very very particular
amount
because no orbits are allowed with n
equals
two and a half or two point three or
anything it has to be in these integer
steps
and that's what gives us these specific
differences between the energies that
gives us the wavelengths
and so you can see that in this nicely
drawn uh cartoon
that depending on which energy level
an electron is in it might drop down and
give out some light
and so if it was to drop all the way in
from the top to the bottom it would give
out a large amount of energy
and then correspondingly smaller amounts
of energy are available for different
transitions and because they're all
related
the energy levels are all related to n
in fact to n squared we can work out the
energies and calculate them all
very very very precisely to about 10
decimal places
that's how well we know what's going on
and so
what you find is that you get different
series
of wavelengths that a hydrogen atom
can emit corresponding to the different
groups of jumps
and the different groups depend on where
it's ending up
it matters whether it's landing on the n
equals one level in which case we call
it the lyman
series the next less uh energetic ones
are the balmer series
that drop from some level down to level
two
the passion series end at level three
the bracket at level four
and fund at level five and so
when you look at the spectrum of
hydrogen in in particular
here here is the balmer series these are
the
ones that all end at level two
and this nice red one at 656.28
nanometers the hydrogen alpha line
that we use in our solar telescopes
that's an electron dropping
all the way from uh the top level right
down to
level two not going down to level one
because that's even more energy and we
see those in their lyman series and
they're usually
in the uh ultraviolet part of the
spectrum because they have
more energy
so here is the where they are in the
uh spectrum there's the lyman ones in
the ultraviolet
here's the balmer ones that we can see
with our eyes and these other ones occur
at lower energies down in the infrared
so right now you're all experts in
spectroscopy here's the actual
spectrum of 3c 273 compared with the
reference spectrum
and you can see that they've identified
one of the lines here and worked out
that
it's uh moved along by
the amount corresponding to the redshift
um
it's it's really quite difficult to spot
them but this is hydrogen beta here
it goes with this one so again we've got
the same shift
now what this means is that when you
look at the spectrum of um
quasars you can not only measure their
redshift
but you can do all sorts of other tricks
and here are
a whole range of different quasar
spectrum
and they're sorted by
redshift so the ones at the bottom there
have a redshift factor of a z factor of
5.7 so that's quite a long way across
the universe
and then they're gradually going up in
small steps to a redshift of 6.42
zed now what we notice first of all
is that there's nothing much in this
part of the spectrum
until suddenly it all kicks off and then
it has
the characteristic lines in the spectrum
these little tiny bits up here there's
my mouse pointing on there
these are the emission lines and the
absorption lines of hydrogen
but and the main hump there is the
actual light from the quasar
so these lines they're they're being
absorbed out of it
and those are being absorbed not by the
quasar itself but by
clouds of gas along the line of sight
and what you notice is that some of the
spectra have got lots of lines and some
are much cleaner as well as the fact
that the whole thing moves according to
the redshift
here's an example of a really
complicated one
um we've got we've figured out we've got
the the lyman ultraviolet
um lyman alpha line here
but there's all this other um
forest of absorption lines in the
spectrum
which is
going to take some deciphering to try
and figure all of those out
now if we to go back to a 3c 273 again
it's actually relatively clean spectrum
at the top here
here's the main lyman alpha hydrogen
emission line and then all these are
absorptions where it drops down
caused by intervening gas that's taking
a bite out of the the light
now that 3c273 that's only got a
redshift
of 0.15
for zed so it's relatively nearby
compared to
some of these others here's one
with a red shift of 3.62 so much further
away
and what we've done is shifted the
spectrum to line it back up
so we've artificially moved all the all
of this spectrum along
so the peaks line up and then you can
see
all of these dips in the light all of
these places
where light has been taken out of the
spectrum
from that quasar that's much further
away so what's going on well
again here here is i think this is 3c
at the top here again and i've got some
other examples
and you now notice that as they get
further away
they get more complicated and that's
because the light has to travel from
um much further and further distances
and so
it goes through more and more different
clouds of gas
and each cloud of gas takes a bite out
of it
in fact what happens is that each cloud
of gas takes a bite out of it
at the particular frequencies that the
material in that gas which is typically
hydrogen
uh absorbs but
they don't line up with the
position of the quasar because they're
at a different distance
and therefore they've suffered a
different redshift from our point of
view
because of the hubble law and the
different um
amount of expansion of the universe so
what happens is the light sets off from
the quasar
gradually gets red-shifted as it comes
to us
and each time it goes through a cloud so
the first goes through this first cloud
that takes a bite out of it at the
frequency of hydrogen then it goes
through another cloud here
and that takes a bite out of it at the
frequency of hydrogen
but that is red
shifted differently to this one
then we get a third one that takes a
bite out of it but it's
redshifted by a lesser amount and then
finally the nearby one takes a bite out
of it here
and so in fact these absorption features
in the quasar spectrum are telling us
about the presence of these
clouds of gas along the line of sight
and in fact the density of the an amount
amount of gas in each cloud determines
the shape depth and so on of this uh
of each peak and so when we
look at a very distant quasar if we're
very clever we can identify
all of these individual peaks as being
a red-shifted peak of hydrogen or a
red-shifted absorption
feature of hydrogen and the fact that
there are multiple
lines from each cloud for all the
different
uh possible transitions within the
hydrogen atom
helps us do that each each corresponding
redshift has got like a
a comb with a number of teeth on it
that's taking a bite out
and so by sliding a model backwards and
forwards we can account for all of these
peaks
as different clouds of different
densities at different distances
and if you do that and you manage to
decipher it all
out fully what you are actually doing is
creating a density map
of the gas along the line of sight to
the quasar
yeah so the full spectrum of a quasar
in the background here has
all of these absorption lines from the
intervening gas and dust
and so on then it has its own emission
line that gives it its characteristic
redshift and distance
um and then other features further on
down here
to do with other elements that also help
uh confirm it
but by deciphering all these individual
absorptions we can create this map of
the density
of the hydrogen gas at every different
distance point all the way along
the line of sight to the quasar
and that's exactly how a cat scan works
a ct
or cat scan this stands for
um computer aided tomography
and tomography is the idea of shining a
beam
through something from several different
directions
and so this patient is going to be slid
backwards into the machine here
and it's going to have an x-ray source
and
as a number of x-ray detectors and it's
going to shine
beams of x-rays through the patient and
measure the absorption along each line
of sight
so it's using those lines of sight in
the same way that we can make
one quasar give us one line of sight
so perhaps this diagram here shows it a
little bit better
here's the x-ray source and the patient
and we have a whole range of detectors
like this
and this whole circular apparatus
rotates around the patient
so that it shines the beams through at
all possible
angles in one circular slice
and then if they want to map the whole
3d internal structure of the patient
they nudge the patient along a bit and
go round again
do another 360 degrees
and scan a number of slices through the
patient
like this with all these different lines
of sight
and then they feed all of that into a
computer
and the computer can sort out exactly
what the 3d structure of the patient
must be
and from each individual slice it gives
you a a 2d
slice of the density through the the
person
and then by combining all of them from
all the different positions you can get
a full 3d map of it
and so we do that with this quasar light
because we got lots and lots and lots of
quasars
we've got lots and lots of lines of
sight and each one
gives us a map of the density of the
hydrogen gas along the line of sight to
that particular quasar
and so we can do as in this diagram
individual lines of sight are each
telling us a series of
density points in this in this cube
another way of visualizing it is
actually with us at the center here
looking out to all these individual
quasars thousands of them
and getting uh an indication of the
density of the gas along each line of
sight
in this is as if it's in only 2d but of
course
we're doing a full 360 degree uh
scan round out the whole of a sphere and
with that
you can build up maps of the the gas
that look like this and the amazing
thing is that when we do simulations
of the formation of the
universe from first principles from the
big bang
and we include all the matter and all
the dark matter
then our simulations look just like this
and that's very very useful in
confirming the theory
but i do think it's quite amazing that
we can
actually prove what the density of
all of these clouds of gas that we can't
really see
going out many many uh
tens of millions of light years in every
direction from the earth is
just by studying the uh
how the light from these quasars are
being absorbed by the gas at every point
along the way and if the universe wasn't
expanding
and therefore redshifting each cloud of
gas to a different amount
then all those uh
lines in the spectrum would all be piled
one on top of the other and we wouldn't
be able to do this
but because we live in an expanding
universe we can
separate all of that out um and with
very clever software
produce a 3d map of the whole of the
universe
as if we'd taken the whole thing and put
it in a cat scanner
so that's where i will bring that one to
an end